=== PAGE 0 ===
PATTERN  AND  REPERTOIRE 
IN HISTORY 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:05 AM

=== PAGE 1 ===
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:05 AM

=== PAGE 2 ===
Pattern and Repertoire 
in History 
Bertrand Μ.  Roehner 
Tony Syme 
HARVARD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 
Cambridge,  Massachusetts 
London,  England  ·  2002 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:05 AM

=== PAGE 3 ===
Copyright  ©  2002 by the  President  and  Fellows  of Harvard  College 
All rights  reserved 
Printed  in  the  United  States  of America 
Library of  Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Roehner,  Bertrand  M„  1946-
Pattern  and  repertoire  in  history  / Bertrand  Μ.  Roehner,  Tony Syme. 
p. cm. 
Includes  bibliographical  references  and  index. 
ISBN 0-674-00739-5  (alk.  paper) 
1. History—Methodology.  2.  Forecasting-—History.  3.  History—Historiography. 
4. Social sciences  and  history.  I.  Syme, Tony. II.  Title. 
D16 .R68  2002 
907'.2—dc21  2001051915 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:05 AM

=== PAGE 4 ===
It may be that  to  some  my History  will not make  agreeable reading  because 
of the absence  in it of fanciful  stories. I shall be satisfied if what I have writ-
ten is useful  to those  who wish to know  what happened  in the  past and,  hu-
man nature  being  what it is, may well happen  again. 
Thucydides,  History of the Peloponnesian War 
Having gathered  these  facts, Watson, I smoked several pipes over them,  try-
ing to separate  those  which were crucial  from  others  which were merely in-
cidental. 
Sir Arthur  Conan  Doyle, "The Adventure  of the Crooked  Man" 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:05 AM

=== PAGE 5 ===
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:05 AM

=== PAGE 6 ===
Preface 
The history  of a country  is like a river. As we walk along  its banks,  our  at-
tention  is  drawn  to  the  river's  sparkling,  ever-changing  surface,  with  its 
swirls and  sudden  directional  changes.  But watching  from  a  safe distance 
we find  that  the  picture  becomes  more  orderly.  One  may  observe  that 
whenever the  river becomes  narrower  the  speed of the stream  increases,  or 
that a rocky riverbed  produces  more  turbulence  at the  surface.  If such ob-
servations  are  intended  to  be more  than  just  casual  remarks,  they  have to 
be confirmed  by studying  not  just  one  but  several  rivers.  That,  in  a  nut-
shell, encapsulates  our  approach  in  this  book.  The  rationale  for  such  a 
project  lies in the  obvious  fact  that  there  can  be  no  scientific  explanation 
for unique  events. Unique events can only be described  and,  as pointed  out 
by Veyne (1984),  this  is precisely what  history  does.  In this  book  we con-
sider historical  events from a comparative  perspective.  In the past the com-
parative approach  has  been  pioneered  either  by  comparative  historians, 
such as  Clausewitz,  Marx,  Bloch, Braudel,  and  Snooks,  or by sociologists, 
such as  Dürkheim,  Pareto,  Connor,  Goldstone,  Hechter,  Lieberson,  and 
Tilly. But in recent  years the field of historical  sociology  has experienced  a 
rapid development.  Many  innovative  ideas  have  been  put  forward  that 
have provided  the  impetus  to explore  new directions. 
Recent research  has  mostly  concentrated  on  what  can  be called macro-
sociology or macrohistory.  One  notable  exception  is the work of Tilly, who 
has extensively explored popular  disturbances;  in a similar way this book is 
mainly concerned  with  microhistorical  events.  Our  primary  objective  is to 
show that  the  concepts  of historical  pattern  and  repertoire  introduced  by 
Tilly have a fairly large scope of application.  We show that  by breaking  up 
complex historical  phenomena  into  simpler  "modules,"  it becomes  possi-
IX 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:05 AM

=== PAGE 7 ===
χ Preface 
ble to study  the latter  from  the point  of view of sociology. In this way, his-
torical sociology can aspire to bridging  the long-standing  gap between his-
tory and  sociology.  Sometimes,  especially  when  we  want  to  refer  to  the 
decomposition  of a historical episode into  simpler components,  we use the 
expression "analytical  history";  the  field  of  analytical  history  should  be 
seen as a branch,  a ramification,  of historical  sociology. 
This book  focuses  on a  few, but fairly  different,  historical  phenomena. 
They range from  the French  Revolution  to  the  Pacific War. Clearly a sepa-
rate book  could  be written  on  each of these events. But in focusing  on one 
specific topic we would miss  our  main  objective;  we do not  want  to  write 
yet another  book  about  the  French  Revolution  or  the  Pacific  War, but  to 
show that  both  phenomena  can  be studied  (and  better  understood)  using 
the methods  of  analytical  history.  In  other  words,  we would  like  to  con-
vince the reader that  the approach  we propose  has a wide applicability. The 
first chapter  explains  the  methodology,  then  in  the  subsequent  chapters  a 
number  of case studies  show how it can be implemented.  "A tree is judged 
by its  fruits"  goes the  popular  saying;  similarly  we  wish  this  book  to  be 
judged on  the  basis of the  new  connections  that  it  suggests, on the  unex-
pected regularities  that  it discloses, and on the basic historical  mechanisms 
that it highlights. 
At this point  a word of caution  may be useful  to emphasize  that  the  sat-
isfactions to  be  procured  from  this  book  are  of  a  different  nature  than 
those expected  from  standard  historical  works.  The  chapters  that  follow 
contain  (in  Thucydides'  words) few  "fanciful  stories"; instead  they  provide 
sequences and fragments  of  stories that are considered  from a comparative 
perspective. The  gratification  one  gets from  the  comparison  of  these  par-
tial accounts,  we  hope,  is  an  understanding  of  the  deep  similarities  be-
tween seemingly  unrelated  sequences.  In  short,  behind  the  confounding 
complexity of  historical  events  a  hidden  order  will  be seen  to  emerge.  In 
Chapter  6,  for  example,  we recount  how  in  September  1914  Von Kluck's 
army suddenly  turned  away from Paris and  marched  eastward  contrary  to 
orders received  from  the  General  Staff.  But we  stop  the  narrative  at  this 
point  without  relating  subsequent  events,  such as the battle  of the  Marne 
and how  the German  advance  was checked. Instead,  in order  to  better  un-
derstand  Von  Kluck's  conduct,  we  set  out  to  examine  the  behavior  of 
other German  generals  in  the  Franco-Prussian  and  Austro-Prussian  wars. 
Thus the reader  will find that  we shift  from one  country  at a given time  to 
other countries  and  to other  periods.  Instead  of reading  just another  story, 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:05 AM

=== PAGE 8 ===
Preface xi 
the reader  will  be  able  to  see  connections  between  seemingly  unrelated 
events. Realizing  that  German  generals  acted  similarly  at  the  battles  of 
Sadowa (1866)  and  Gravelotte  (1870),  he  will  no  longer  be  surprised  by 
Von Kluck's attitude.  Taken alone,  Von Kluck's behavior  is  nothing  more 
than an  anecdote;  considered  in conjunction  with similar  situations,  it tells 
us something  about  how  the  German  High  Command  functioned  as  an 
organization.  In the first case it is a record in military  history, in the second 
it is a contribution  to  the sociology of organizations. 
Writing this  book  has  been  an  exhilarating  journey  in  the  course  of 
which we have roamed  through  many  periods  and  events.  In some  places 
we may  have  erred;  that  is  almost  inevitable  if  one  considers  the  extent 
and the  diversity  of  the  data  that  needed  to  be  processed.  We  welcome 
notification  of  possible  errors  or  omissions.  It  may  also  be  that  in  some 
places our  statements  appear  a  little  too  categorical;  we fully  realize that 
the problems  that  we deal with are  multifaceted,  but to  surround  each  ar-
gument  in a multitude  of reservations  would make the text difficult  to read 
without  adding  anything  to our  purpose. 
A first draft  of this book was written  in 1993. Although the  main lines of 
the project  have remained  the  same since then,  many of our ideas have be-
come more  precise thanks  to a number  of discussions  and email exchanges 
with colleagues. It is a pleasure to acknowledge those who have encouraged 
us and offered  their advice. Pierre Chaunu,  Francesco Galassi, and Charles 
Tilly were among  the first to believe in this undertaking;  we are grateful  for 
their unfailing  support.  In 1998  one  of us spent  three  months  at  Harvard 
as an  invited  scholar.  Lectures  on  "pattern  and  repertoire"  were given at 
Harvard,  the  State University of New York, the University  of Arizona,  and 
the University  of California-Davis;  many thanks  to Stanley Lieberson, Im-
manuel  Wallerstein,  Michael  Hechter,  Dane  Archer,  Jack Goldstone,  and 
John Hall  for  their  interest  and  their  advice.  While we were pursuing  this 
project  Graeme  Snooks  reactivated  and  renewed  the  field of comparative 
history  by publishing  an  impressive  trilogy. Many thanks  to him  for  lead-
ing the way. 
As is often  the  case  for  new  ideas,  a  primary  difficulty  was to  get  our 
approach  accepted  (to  some  extent)  by  other  social  scientists;  Stanley 
Lieberson, our  reviewers,  and  Michael  Aronson  of  Harvard  University 
Press played an instrumental  role in that  respect.  Without  their  insight  this 
book would  not  have  been  published  in  its  present  form;  our  sincere 
thanks  to  them.  Through  her  apt  queries  and  suggestions,  Elizabeth 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:05 AM

=== PAGE 9 ===
xii Preface 
Gilbert helped  us  to  improve  the  manuscript  in  many  respects;  it  was  a 
pleasure and  a privilege to work with her. 
Our colleagues,  both  in  Paris and  at Warwick and  Oxford,  have been of 
great assistance  on  many  occasions,  and  we  are  particularly  grateful  to 
Laurent Baulieu, Bernard  Diu,  Jean Letessier, and Ahmed  Tounsi. 
The book is dedicated to our  wives and children,  who have patiently  put 
their faith  in  us;  their  cheerful  encouragement  and  stimulating  support 
have been invaluable. 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:05 AM

=== PAGE 10 ===
PATTERN  AND  REPERTOIRE 
IN HISTORY 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:05 AM

=== PAGE 11 ===
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:05 AM

=== PAGE 12 ===
Contents 
Preface ix 
1 Analytical  History:  Where History  and  Sociology Meet 1 
PART I.  REVOLUTIONS 
2 European  Variants  of the French Revolution  57 
Β  Building  Blocks of the French  Revolution  100 
4 The  American  Revolution  139 
5 General  Strikes, Mushroom  Strikes 169 
PART II.  WARS 
6 Wars  for Territorial Expansion  207 
7 The  Constraints  of Logistics 300 
PART III.  PROSPECTS 
8 Historical  Forecasting  335 
9 Perspectives  364 
References 381 
Index 407 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:05 AM

=== PAGE 13 ===
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:05 AM

=== PAGE 14 ===
CHAPTER 
1 
1 
Analytical History: 
Where History  and Sociology Meet 
"Where History  and  Sociology  Meet," the title  of a paper  by  John  R. Hall 
(1992), refers  to  an  appealing  but  rather  problematic  encounter.  Indeed 
from  Marx  and  Pareto  up  to  the  present  time,  several attempts  have been 
made to marry  history  and sociology. Such a field, commonly  referred  to as 
sociohistory  or historical  sociology, would combine  the potentialities  of its 
parent  disciplines;  history  would  bring  its  extensive and  detailed  knowl-
edge of  particular  events,  and  sociology,  thanks  to  its  theoretical  insight, 
would enable  us  to  structure  and  organize  that  vast  amount  of  empirical 
evidence. The  agenda  is  a fascinating  one.  Needless  to  say, that  marriage 
can be arranged  in a number  of different  ways. Currently  historical  sociol-
ogy is a mosaic  of  various  approaches  developed  by  a number  of  distin-
guished scholars,  including  Connor,  Goldstone,  Hechter,  Laitin, Flora, and 
Tilly, rather than  being  a unified field. That diversity attests to the field's vi-
tality and  rapid  development.  Hall  in  his  1992  paper  makes  a  perceptive 
and penetrating  analysis of the  different  strategies that  can  and  have been 
used. 
In the  second  section  of this  chapter  we discuss these different  options, 
after giving a  quick  overview  of  our  approach  in  the  first  section.  In  the 
third and  fourth  sections  we  delineate  our  approach  in  more  detail.  Its 
most important  feature  is its focus  on  "simple"  phenomena;  many  of  its 
other characteristics  derive  from  this  requirement.  For  such  simple  phe-
nomena  it  becomes  possible  to  consider  several  historical  manifestations; 
this in turn  leads  us to a discussion of recurrent  events.  Finally, in the fifth 
section, in order  to  give the reader  some  sense of the  kind  of understand-
ing provided  by  this  approach,  we briefly  describe  several of the  patterns 
that will be discovered in later chapters.  In a general way the observation  of 
1 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 15 ===
2 Analytical  History 
a definite  pattern  is a good starting  point  for  the search for a theory. In this 
chapter we also introduce  a number  of  general concepts,  including  modu-
larization,  paronymy,  parsimony,  and  collective  historical  memory,  which 
will be used throughout  the  rest of the book. 
Not Because It Is Important but Because It Is Simple 
There has been only one French Revolution;  but,  as we shall see in Chapter 
3, there have been  three  stormings  of  the  Bastille (1560,  1588, and 1789), 
about twenty  meetings  of  the  Estates-General,  and,  throughout  Europe, 
more than  fifteen  episodes  involving  a  confiscation  of Church  estates.  In 
other words, by breaking down  a complex phenomenon  into  simpler  ones, 
one is able to study  many  instances  instead  of just a single one. What is to 
be gained from this? The approach  makes  a considerable  difference,  for, as 
is well known,  there  can  be  no  scientific  explanation  for  unique  events; 
only descriptions  are  possible. Another  way to put  it  is to say that by con-
sidering sets of events, one shifts  from history  to comparative  history  and 
sociology. Decomposing  a  complex  phenomenon  into  simpler  ones  also 
has other  advantages,  as is made clear by the following  analogy. 
A "Not  So  Simple" Experiment 
Consider  the  following  experiment.  A  person  takes  a  bottle  of  cola  from 
the refrigerator,  fills a paper  cup,  and,  perhaps  because  he or she does not 
like drinking  ice-cold  cola, leaves the  cup  in  the  sun  on  the  kitchen  table. 
Slowly the  cola  will warm  up.  This  experiment,  which  is  schematized  in 
Figure 1.1a, can be labeled "the  warming  of a cup of cola." However simple 
the label sounds,  the experiment  itself is by no means  simple,  at least if we 
look at it from the  eyes of a physicist (Table 1.1).  First the  sunlight  has  to 
be transformed  into  heat,  either  on  the  surface  of the  cup  or  in  the  upper 
layer of  the  cola.  The  transformation  of  radiation  into  heat  (following 
Wien's law) has  been  fully  understood  by  physicists only  since  the  begin-
ning of the  twentieth  century.  Then  the  heat  has  to travel through  the  pa-
per cup  and  be  transmitted  to  the  liquid.  The  phenomenon  of  thermal 
conduction  is  fairly  complex  and  was  modeled  satisfactorily  only  by  the 
late nineteenth  century.  Finally the  fact  that  the  cola becomes  warmer  on 
the side exposed to the  sun gives rise to convection  streams  within  the  liq-
uid. The equation  describing  such streams  are well known in hydrodynam-
ics (Navier-Stokes  equations),  but  they  are  highly  complicated;  solving 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 16 ===
Analytical  History  3 
Sunlight 
Figure 1.1a The  warming  of a cup of cola. The figure schematically  represents  an 
experiment  in  which  a cup is filled with ice-cold  cola and is left to warm  up  in the 
sun. One  may be tempted  to  consider  this  a simple phenomenon;  yet from the 
perspective  of a physicist, it is in fact very complicated.  Its understanding  draws 
upon  four  different  branches  of physics: optics for the transformation  of light 
into heat,  statistical mechanics  for  the propagation  of  heat through  the  cup, 
hydrodynamics  for  the creation  of convection  streams  between  points  that  are at 
different  temperatures,  and  thermodynamics  for  the diffusion  of the  heat 
throughout  the  volume  of the  liquid.  This example  calls into question  the  usual 
belief that  social phenomena  are  inherently  more  complicated  than  those  of the 
natural  sciences. 
them,  even  in  an  approximate  way,  would  require  hours  on  a  high-speed 
computer. 
What does  this  story  tell  us?  (1)  It  is often  claimed  that  social  and  eco-
nomic  phenomena  are  far more  complex  than  those  considered  in  the  nat-
ural sciences.  This  is  a questionable  statement,  as  our  example  shows;  the 
warming  of  a  cup  of  cola  turns  out  to  be  an  incredibly  complicated  phe-
nomenon  even  though  our  description  was  simplified  in  many  ways  (we 
did not,  for  example,  take  into  account  the  role  of  the  bubbles).  (2)  How 
then  can  we explain  why  physics  has  been  so  successful  in  the  last  few  cen-
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 17 ===
4 Analytical  History 
Table 1.1 Decomposition  of  a complex  phenomenon  into  modules 
Warming of  a cup of  cola Field 
Transformation  of  sunlight  into  heat  Optics 
Propagation  of  heat  in  a solid/liquid  Statistical  mechanics 
Convection  created  by  a  Hydrodynamics 
temperature  differential 
Diffusion  of heat  in  the  cola  Thermodynamics 
Number  of  Number  of 
occurrences  occurrences 
French Revolution in  France  in  Europe 
How  indebtedness  weakened  the  10  30 
power  of  the  monarchy 
Tactical alliance  between  the  5  15 
bourgeoisie  and  the  clergy 
Confiscation  of  Church  estates  1  20 
Insurrection  in  the  capital  city  5  25 
Note: For France, the number  of  occurrences  is based on  a detailed enumeration;  for  the 
whole of Europe, the numbers  should  rather  be considered as loose approximations. 
turies? The  answer  is  easy: physicists have restricted  themselves  to  simple 
problems.  Nobody  has ever tried  to  give a complete  theory  for  the warm-
ing of a  cup of cola.  Instead  physics has concentrated  its  attention  on  the 
different  subphenomena  involved  in that  experiment,  that  is, the transfor-
mation  of light into  heat, the conduction  of heat in a solid, and so on. Each 
of these phenomena  has first been studied  under  the simplest possible con-
ditions.  The conduction  of heat, for instance, is easier to study  in copper  or 
aluminum  than  in a heterogeneous  material  such as paper or cardboard.  In 
a general way physics leaves aside all questions  that  turn  out  to be too  dif-
ficult, even if they  are of fundamental  as well as practical  importance.  For 
example, why  does  water  boil  at  100°C  and  not,  say, at 120°C,  or  why  is 
iron ferromagnetic  while copper  or  aluminum  is  not? Such questions  are 
never touched  upon  in textbooks. 
Simplicity, a  Basic  Requirement  of  the  Human  Mind 
Decomposing  complicated  phenomena  into  simpler  ones  is  an  approach 
that has  been  used  not  only  in physics but  also  in  other  fields. In  astron-
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 18 ===
Analytical  History  5 
omy, the  laws  of  celestial  mechanics  were  first  established  for  Mars.  Al-
though  basically governed by the same  laws, the orbits  of comets  or aster-
oids are  more  difficult  to  decipher.  In  the  same  vein  one  can  mention 
Pareto's (1917) perceptive  remark  that  the  discovery of the laws of gravita-
tion was favored by the fact that the  mass of the sun is much larger (about 
one thousand  times)  than  the  mass of the largest planets;  under  other  cir-
cumstances,  for  instance,  with a  lighter sun  or  with  a  double  star  in  place 
of the  sun,  the  movements  of  the  planets  would  be  considerably  more 
complicated;  this  would  have  made  the  discovery  of  Newton's  law  much 
more difficult.  In chemistry,  as  well, the  fundamental  concepts  were  laid 
down by analyzing simple chemical  elements  rather  than  products  such  as 
wood, steel, or wine;  the  latter,  though  undoubtedly  more  useful,  are also 
much more  complex.  Similarly, the basic laws of genetics were first estab-
lished for  Mendel's garden  peas and for  Morgan's drosophilia. 
In fact  the rule  that  a problem  should  be divided  "into  as many parts  as 
would be required  for  a better solution"  was stated more  than  three  centu-
ries ago by the  philosopher  and  scientist  Descartes  (1965  [1637]).  Subse-
quently the term  "modular  approach"  has been used to refer to the decom-
position  of a complex phenomenon  into  simpler  ones. 
Nowadays this  approach  is  used  extensively  in  computer  science,  be-
cause it helps to economize  "on the most  scarce resource  in nature,  the in-
tellect" (Snooks  1997).  Suppose a computer  programmer  wants  to write  a 
software program  for  airline  reservations.  He  will  design  different  mod-
ules: one  for  schedules,  another  for  fares, a third  for  reservations,  and  so 
on. Moreover each  of these  programs  will itself have a modular  structure. 
In that  way, if a  change  has  to  be  made,  only  one  submodule  has  to  be 
modified.  In contrast,  if the  program  is  not  structured  into  modules,  any 
small change  at one  place may require  substantial  alterations  in the  rest of 
the program.  In short,  the modular  approach  has  two distinct  advantages: 
it saves  a  considerable  amount  of  work,  and,  most  important,  it  makes 
possible a cumulative  development  of  human  knowledge.  In the  next  sec-
tion we discuss the latter aspect from  another  perspective. 
Limitations of  the Phenomenological Approach 
Coming  back to the warming  of a cup of cola, one may object that a much 
simpler approach  can be used. By repeating the observation  under  sunlight 
of varying  intensity,  it is possible to  estimate,  for  instance,  the  correlation 
between the  intensity  of light and the  velocity of the convection  streams  or 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 19 ===
6 Analytical  History 
the temperature  in  the  upper  layers  of  the  cola.  Doing  this  bypasses  the 
various  complicated  phenomena  that  we mentioned  above;  in physics such 
an approach  would  be  called  a  phenomenological  model,  by  which  one 
means  that  it is purely  empirical  and  established  by statistical  methods.  Ba-
sically this is the approach  used  in econometrics;  it is also used in sociology 
by those researchers  who have adopted  the  techniques  of econometricians. 
This approach  indeed  looks  very  appealing  because  of its simplicity,  but 
here the  simplicity  is rather  illusory.  The  phenomenon  still  remains  com-
plicated;  it is only  the  model  that  looks  simple.  The  shortcomings  of  such 
an approach  are  obvious.  If  one  replaces  the  paper  cup  with  a  glass,  the 
whole study  has  to  be  resumed  anew;  similarly  if  the  cola  is  replaced  by 
milk (which  is white)  or  by water  (which  is  transparent),  none  of  the  pre-
vious correlations  will  hold.  In  other  words,  if even  a  single  parameter  is 
changed  the  whole  study  has  to  be  restarted  from  the  beginning.  On  the 
contrary,  once  the  physicist  has  understood  the  transformation  of  light 
into heat  he will know  how the results  have to be adapted  if the color  or the 
reflection  index  of the  liquid  is changed. 
It has  often  been  deplored  (see  Summers  1991  for  an economist's  view) 
that  in  the  social  sciences  knowledge  does  not  seem  to  grow  cumulatively. 
This "Sisyphus  syndrome"  can  be  attributed  to  the  lack  of  interest  in 
breaking  down  complex  phenomena  into  simpler  ones.  In the  next  section 
we examine  how  the  modular  approach  can  be applied  in  history. 
The Modular Approach  in  History 
Let us come  back  to the  example  of  the  French  Revolution  in  order  to  ex-
amine  how  our  ideas  about  simplicity  and  modularity  can  be  adapted  to 
history.  We have  already  mentioned  three  possible  modules,  namely,  the 
meetings  of  the  Estates-General,  the  confiscation  of  Church  estates,  and 
the Parisian  insurrection.  Needless  to  say, these  three  episodes  are  only  a 
part  of  a larger sample,  which  is illustrated  in  Figure  1.1b.  In this  book  we 
sometimes  use  the  term  "analytical  history"  to  refer  to  the  study  of  the 
modules  composing  a complex  phenomenon.  A similar  approach  was pro-
posed  by Veyne (1976)  in  his opening  lecture  at the  College de France;  un-
fortunately  he  did  not  have  the  opportunity  to  carry  out  his  research 
agenda  in  subsequent  years. 
It remains  to  show  how  these  different  modules  can  be  studied  sepa-
rately and  to  examine  what  can  be learned  from  such a modular  approach. 
For purposes  of  illustration,  we consider  the  meeting  of  the  Estates-Gen-
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 20 ===
Analytical  History  7 
Selected Components of the French Revolution 
Public debt 
Price increase for grains 
Meeting of the Estates-General 
Insurrection of Parisian population 
Unrest in the countryside (Great Fear) 
Confiscation of Church's estates 
King's failed flight 
Figure 1.1b The  French Revolution  can  be broken up  into  a number  of  separate 
episodes  much  in  the same way that the warming  of a cup of  cola  can. The com-
ponents  with  a thick border are examined  in  detail in Chapter 3. Needless  to say, 
other episodes  could  be added  to this  list, such as the civil war in Vendee or 
Brittany. Usually  these components  can  be further  decomposed  into  smaller 
subcomponents.  In  its principle  this  decomposition  of  a complex  phenomenon 
into building  blocks  is similar to the approach  advocated  by Lieberson (1992);  in 
his words,  such an approach would  permit  knowledge  to (cumulatively)  build  on 
knowledge. 
eral. In the centuries  before  1789, the Estates-General  and  parliaments  (be-
fore the  eighteenth  century  the  two  words  are  almost  interchangeable) 
were summoned  repeatedly  not only in France but also in Britain,  the Ger-
man states  (for  example,  Bavaria,  Hesse,  Prussia,  Saxony, and  Württem-
berg), Spain,  Sweden,  and  in  many  other  European  countries.  A  cross-
national  comparison  of  such  meetings  discloses a  number  of  regularities; 
for instance, it helps us to understand  the  conditions  for  a tactical alliance 
between the  bourgeoisie  and  the  clergy, or  shows  to  what  extent  the  au-
thority  of  the  monarch  was  weakened  and  undermined  by  indebtedness 
(see, in this  respect,  Goldstone  1991);  one  also realizes that  the  vote for  a 
Bill of Rights  was a crucial  step  for  the  bourgeoisie  in  its  power  struggle 
with the monarchy.  In short,  all these events that played an essential role in 
1789 can  be  observed  in  earlier  meetings  of  the  Estates-General  either  in 
France or in other  European  states.  A number  of studies  have already been 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 21 ===
8 Analytical  History 
concerned with similar issues; for example, Carsten (1959)  has  studied the 
parliaments in  the German  states, Picot  (1872)  has  written a  detailed his-
tory of the meetings of  the French  Estates-General. But  so far such studies 
have been conducted  in  an  unsystematic  and  haphazard  way. There  have 
thus been  a  number  of  important  comparative  historians,  but  as  a  field, 
comparative history  still lacks a sound and coherent  basis. 
Applications 
Three examples  suggest ways in  which  the  decomposition  of  a  complex 
phenomenon into  modules can be of practical relevance. 
HOW  LOUIS  XVI  COULD  HAVE  SAVED  HIS  THRONE  IN  1789 
Louis XVI  could  (perhaps)  have  saved his throne  and  his head in 1789 
by carefully studying the  course  of  action  taken by his ancestor  Charles  V 
when confronted  with a similar situation in February-March  1358. 
Charles V faced the opposition of  both the Estates-General and the Pari-
sian population.  His  position  was all the more  difficult since  he was only 
the dauphin  while King John  II  was held captive  in  Britain.  Yet not  only 
did Charles V save his throne, but within a year he was able to curb the Pa-
risian uprising. His  plan was to  leave Paris, gather  support  from  the  pro-
vincial capitals, and isolate the Parisian rebels. His first attempt to flee Paris 
failed, but a week later he managed to find refuge among  his supporters in 
Senlis, a city about 40  kilometers to  the north  of  Paris. As we know, Louis 
XVI also  tried  to  leave  Paris,  but  his  plan  had  little  in  common  with 
Charles's strategy. First,  he  waited too  long;  by  the  end  of  June 1791  the 
new regime was already firmly established. Second, instead of  seeking ref-
uge in a major  provincial  city  he headed for a  small town, Montm£dy, on 
the Belgian border  (Figure  1.2).  Belgium at  that  time  was part  of  Austria; 
seeking refuge  under  Austrian  protection  was  seen  as  a  betrayal  by  the 
French public. At Varennes-en-Argonne Louis  XVI was recognized and ar-
rested. Of course we cannot take for granted that a more clever plan would 
have saved him, but at least studying Charles's experience would have sug-
gested to him a more sensible course of action. 
Incidentally, a third episode of this kind occurred  in France in the twen-
tieth century. In May 1968,  challenged by social and political unrest, Presi-
dent Charles  de  Gaulle left Paris.  Using  Charles  V's  strategy  would  have 
been unthinkable; instead, de Gaulle came  back to Paris the  next  day. His 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 22 ===
Analytical  History  9 
Figure 1.2 Comparison  of  the flights from  Paris of Charles V (1358)  and  Louis 
XVI (1791).  Charles V did  not  go  far; Senlis, where he found  refuge among  his 
supporters,  is only  40 kilometers  away from Paris. Louis XVI, on the  contrary, 
made for  a small town,  Montmedy,  on  the Belgian  border, 240 kilometers  away 
from Paris. Belgium  at that time  was part of Austria and in June 1791  the  rela-
tions between  France and Austria were already strained; war was to break out  less 
than a year later. At Varennes-en-Argonne  Louis  XVI was recognized,  his guards 
were disarmed,  and he was put under  arrest. 
departure,  however, had  created  a  psychological  shock;  within  a  few days 
the situation  was again under  control. 
Sometimes even a careful  analysis is not sufficient  to change  the  course 
of history.  An example  is provided  by Napoleon's  campaign  in  Russia. Na-
poleon  was  not  in  the  habit  of  trusting  his  fate  to luck;  before  the  cam-
paign he ordered  a careful  analysis of Charles  XII's 1709 campaign  in Rus-
sia. Yet this did not  save his army; Russia was probably  just too  vast. But at 
least he did not  repeat  Charles's  errors. 
STRATEGIC  PLANNING  IN  WORLD  WAR  II 
Like the  French  Revolution,  World  War  II  was  of  course  unique;  but 
some of its modules  were not.  Such is the case for the war in Europe.  Stra-
tegically the problem  was fairly simple. In 1942 one country,  Germany, and 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 23 ===
10 Analytical  History 
its allies  occupied  almost  the  whole  of  continental  Europe.  The  United 
States along  with Britain  had  control  of the  seas (at  least after  mid-1942), 
and they  had  an  important  ally,  Russia,  in  Europe.  Replace  "Germany" 
with "France"  and "United  States  and Britain"  with Britain  alone,  and  the 
description  will  apply to the  Napoleonic  Wars. This is more  than  a  super-
ficial similarity.  In  Chapter  6  we show  that  there  is  a striking  parallelism 
between many  strategic  or tactical  episodes  of the  two wars, including  the 
war in  Libya (versus  Egypt),  the  war in Italy  (versus Spain),  the resistance 
and uprisings  in  occupied  countries,  the  submarine  war  in  the  Atlantic 
(versus privateers). 
THE  FRENCH  GENERAL  STRIKE  OF  DECEMBER  I995 
On November  23,  1995, a strike  of  railway  workers  began  in  Tours  in 
protest  against  a  plan  to  raise  the  retirement  age.  On  November  25  the 
strike spread to other  railway centers, and on November  28, the workers of 
Electricite de France (a power utility)  joined  the  strike.  At this point  it be-
came clear that  the strike belonged to the class of what we call in Chapter  5 
"mushroom  strikes."  Strikes of this  sort  had  previously  occurred  in  1936, 
1953,1960, and  1968. All lasted about  one  month.  Thus  by the end of No-
vember 1995, it was possible to predict  that  the  strike would first spread  to 
the whole  country  but  also that  it would be  over by the end  of December. 
This is precisely what  happened.  In  Chapter  5  we report  how  this  predic-
tion was  made  publicly  and  how  it  was indeed  confirmed  by subsequent 
events. 
Comparative  Approaches  in  Historical Sociology 
The idea directs the experiment. 
Claude Bernard  (1865) 
An anecdote  is relevant here. In September  1995 one of the authors  partici-
pated in  the  Quantitative  Economic  and  Social  History  Conference  orga-
nized by James Foreman-Peck  at  St. Catherine's  College,  Cambridge.  The 
contributions  fell  into  two  distinct  categories.  The  first  category,  which 
represented  the  overwhelming  majority,  was concerned  with  the  descrip-
tion of a single episode  of social or economic  history  and included  presen-
tations  on topics such as "Retracing the social structure  of late Weimar un-
employment"  or "Danish  unemployment,  1845-1901."  A small number  of 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 24 ===
Analytical  History  11 
participants  took  a  different  approach;  they  began  their  talk  by  asking  a 
question  and  then  went  on  to  analyze  whatever  observations  could  help  to 
answer that  question.  At the time  of the  conference  the difference  between 
these two  viewpoints  passed  almost  unnoticed  by  the  participants.  Yet the 
difference  is considerable.  In the  first case past events  were the  primary  ob-
ject of study,  in the  second  they  were considered  as  a pool  from  which  ob-
servations  could  be selected  in order  to  answer  a specific  question.  The  lat-
ter is the hallmark  of a genuine  comparative  approach;  in Claude  Bernard's 
words,  the  idea  then  directs  the  experiment. 
The comparative  approach  was  introduced  in  economic  history,  partic-
ularly by Marc  Bloch  (1886-1944)  and  the  so-called  Annales  School.  Yet it 
is still used by only  a small minority  of economic  historians. 
In sociology  the  situation  is  different.  Sociology  came  into  being  as  a 
separate  field only  in  the  mid-nineteenth  century  and,  thanks  to  the  con-
tributions  of  scholars  like  Dürkheim  (1858-1917)  and  Pareto  (1848-
1923), the  comparative  approach  quickly  assumed  a  central  role.  But since 
that  time  there  has  been  an  ongoing  debate  about  methodological  issues. 
The Debate over  Comparative Methodology 
In the  last  few  decades  a  number  of  important  contributions  attest  to 
the vivacity  of  the  debate  over  comparative  methodology.  Of  special  sig-
nificance  are Abbott  (1998),  Abrams  (1982),  Burke  (1992),  Dogan  (1994), 
Goldstone  (1982,1997,1999),  Lieberson  (1985,1991,1994),  Lloyd (1993), 
Monkkonen  (1994),  Ragin  (1987,  1997),  Rule  (1997),  Skocpol  (1984), 
Stinchcombe  (1978),  and  Tilly (1985,1997).  At a more  philosophical  level, 
Bunge (1996,1998)  has  analyzed  explanation  in  the  social  sciences in com-
parison  with  physics. 
A recent  book  edited  by Mjöset  (1997),  containing  contributions  from  a 
number  of  authors  who  have  played  an  essential  role  in  the  development 
of historical  sociology,  provides  a  lucid  account  of  the  main  issues.  In 
many  respects  the  approaches  developed  in the  past three  decades  are com-
plementary,  as  detailed  in  Figure  1.3  and  Table  1.2.  Although  the  micro-
macro  distinction  is standard  in  economics,  it is only occasionally  made  in 
sociology  (and  even  less  often  in  history).  In  some  cases  the  qualitative/ 
quantitative  distinction  is clear-cut;  for instance,  Pareto's  analysis  of super-
stitions  is undoubtedly  of a qualitative  character.  But in some  works  qual-
itative and  quantitative  analysis  are  used  hand  in  hand;  one  example  is 
Laitin's work,  another  is the present  book.  One  distinct  advantage  of quan-
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 25 ===
12 Analytical  History 
1. Lines of contact between history and sociology 
Comparative methodology 
Dogan, Goldstone, Lieberson, 
Ragin, Rokkan, Tilly 
Case-oriented approach 
Laitin, Ragin, Snooks, 
Tocqueville 
2. Selected issues in historical sociology 
Repertoire in  recurrent  events 
Pareto, Tilly 
Bridging the  micro-macro gap 
Laitin, Tocqueville 
Role of collective historical memory 
Connor, Pareto 
Figure 1.3 Where  history  and  sociology  meet.  History  and sociology  can be 
brought  together  in  a number  of ways. The first part  of the diagram  lists some of 
the lines of contact  between  history  and  sociology  along with the  names  of some 
of the  scholars  who have explored  them.  The second  part  refers  to more  specific 
aspects of historical  sociology. 
tification  is that  it  greatly  facilitates  comparison.  The  why/how  distinction 
is an important  one  and  will  be  discussed  below. 
At this  point  it  may  be  of  interest  to  examine  to  what  extent  our  ap-
proach  follows  well-established  procedures  for  social  inquiry.  In their  book 
Designing Social  Inquiry  (1994),  King,  Keohane,  and  Verba  discuss  scien-
tific requirements  in  the  social  sciences.  Their  approach  has  important 
points  of  contact  with  ours.  First, the simplicity  condition,  which  is  central 
to our  argument,  is  also  strongly  emphasized  by  King  and  his  colleagues. 
Comparative history 
Bloch, Braudel, Flora, Snooks, 
Sorokin 
Problem-oriented approach 
Archer, Connor, Dürkheim, 
Epstein, French, Goldstone 
Hechter, Laitin, Veyne 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 26 ===
Analytical History  13 
Table 1.2 Complementary  approaches  in  historical  sociology 
Situations Authors 
Microhistory/Macrohistory 
Microhistory 
Macrohistory 
Qualitative/Quantitative 
Qualitative 
Quantitative 
Why?/How? 
Why? 
How? 
Number of  cases 
1-3  (small  N) 
4-10 
More than  10  (large  N) 
Archer  and  Gartner,  Bloch,  Connor,  Deutsch, 
Dürkheim,  French,  Hall,  Hechter,  Laitin,  Pareto, 
Tilly, Tocqueville,  Veyne, R&S 
Braudel,  Flora  et  al.,  Goldstone,  Hechter,  Laitin, 
Lieberson,  Snooks,  Tainter 
Bloch, Connor,  Hall,  Laitin,  Pareto,  Skocpol, 
Tainter, Tocqueville,  R&S 
Archer  and  Gartner,  Braudel,  Dürkheim,  Flora, 
Goldstone,  Laitin,  Lieberson,  Tilly, R&S 
Goldstone,  Hechter,  Laitin,  Skocpol,  Tainter, 
Tocqueville 
Braudel,  Dürkheim,  French,  Hall,  Laitin,  Pareto, 
Snooks,  Tilly, R&S 
Bloch, French,  Hall,  Hechter,  Skocpol,  Tocqueville, 
Veyne 
Connor,  Dürkheim,  Laitin,  Pareto,  Snooks,  Tainter, 
R&S 
Archer  and  Gartner,  Flora  et  al.,  Tilly 
Notes: For the sake of clarity we have not indicated years of publication; they can be found 
in the reference list. This table includes few references to works in cultural sociology, an 
omission related to the fact that cultural aspects are not considered in this book. R&S indi-
cates the present book. 
They  note:  "Systematic  simplification  is  a crucial  step  to  useful  knowledge. 
As an  economic  historian  [E.  Jones]  has  put  it,  if  emphasis  on  uniqueness 
is carried  out  to  the  extreme  of  ignoring  all  regularities  the  very  possibility 
of social  science  is  denied  and  historians  are  reduced  to  the  aimlessness  of 
balladeers"  (p.  43).  Second,  King  and  his  colleagues  recommend  (p.  10) 
that  in  studying  complex  and  in  some  sense  unique  events,  one  should 
consider  them  as  members  of  a  larger  class  of  events;  they  can  thus  be 
studied  in  a  "systematic  and  comparative  fashion."  Such  a  methodology 
will  indeed  be  applied  extensively  in  the  case  studies  in  later  chapters. 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 27 ===
14 Analytical  History 
Third,  Designing Social Inquiry stresses that there  is no substantial  method-
ological difference  between qualitative  and  quantitative  inquiries.  In  our 
book qualitative  and  quantitative  evidence  similarly  complement  each 
other. 
In brief,  our methodological  options  are in line with those  advocated  by 
King and his colleagues. Not surprisingly,  there are also some points  where 
our approaches  diverge. For example,  consider  the  following  rule set forth 
by these authors  for the selection of research questions:  "A research project 
should pose  a  question  that  is  important  in  the  real  world,  one  that  sig-
nificantly  affects  many  people's  lives" (p.  15).  As explained  elsewhere  in 
this chapter,  we favor simplicity even at the cost of significance  in terms  of 
policy implications.  Our  objective  is to find  stable  and  accurate  regulari-
ties, independently  of their  immediate  usefulness. 
The Search for Patterns and  Repertoires 
In The  Mind and  Society (1935), Pareto comments  that  "it is enough  for  us 
to know  that  social  facts  reveal certain  uniformities."  What  Pareto  calls 
uniformities  are  also  commonly  referred  to  as  regularities  or  patterns. 
Finding regularities  is an important  step;  it is a prerequisite  before  one can 
think  of building  a model,  for the regularities  are precisely what the model 
should try  to explain. 
Drawing upon  a formidable  array of empirical  evidence, Tilly (1986) in-
troduced  the  concept  of  a  people's  repertoire  of  action:  "Any population 
has a  limited  repertoire  of  collective action  .  . . People tend  to  act  within 
known limits,  to innovate  at the margins  of existing forms  ...  People  know 
the general  rules  of  performance  and  vary  the  performance  to  meet  the 
purpose  at hand"  (p. 390). In the  pages that  follow, Tilly proposes  a classi-
fication of  the forms  of collective action  before  and after  the industrial  rev-
olution  and  carefully  studies  the  transition  from  one  repertoire  to  the 
other. He  points  out  that  new  forms  of action  are  not  introduced  all  at 
once; they  result  from  many  attempts  and  counterattempts  spread  over 
time. 
Pareto (1935) drew  a similar conclusion  from  his investigation  of super-
stitions, noting:  "It is a curious  fact that the  ties [between  a number  of ele-
ments] so  imagined  persist  in  time.  It would  be  easy enough  to  try  some 
new combination  every  day;  instead  there  is  one  combination,  fantastic 
though  it be, that tends  to prevail over all competitors." 
In all areas it is easier to make  variations  on  a theme  than  to  create new 
themes. Thus  biological  evolution,  if it has indeed  created  here  and  there 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 28 ===
Analytical  History  15 
new forms  and functions,  has above all put together  a few basic patterns  to 
create an incredible  diversity  of living forms.  Jacob (1970) referred  to this 
as the great tinkering  of evolution:  nothing  is thrown away, innovations  are 
shelved for  future  use  in  a  different  context.  This  is  one  of  the  major 
themes of this  book.  The creation  of  new forms  of organization  or  action 
takes place in  history  in  an  extremely  parsimonious  manner.  A structure 
that "works"  will be used  again  many  times,  and  even  when  one  believes 
that it  has  outlived  its  usefulness  one will notice  decades  later  than  some 
elements have been reused  in a different  context. This point  is emphasized 
in the  fascinating  work that  Jenkins  (1986)  has  devoted  to  Jurassian  sepa-
ratism in Switzerland. 
Why versus  How 
Whereas it is fairly easy to show that there  is a correlation  (or  more  gener-
ally a connection)  between  two phenomena,  A and  B, it is much trickier  to 
assess the direction  of the  causality;  is it A -»  Β  or Β  -*• A? In some  special 
cases the  question  has  an  obvious  answer.  For  instance  when  Dürkheim 
(1951) observes  that  suicides  are  most  frequent  on Sundays,  there  can  be 
little doubt  about  the  direction  of  the  causality. But when  Tainter  (1988) 
notes that  fiscal revenue  diminishes  in  times  when  the  state  is weak, it is 
not obvious  which is the cause and which is the effect. 
There are two main  difficulties  with causality  in the social sciences; one 
is technical,  the other  of an  epistemological  nature.  The first is the multi-
factorial  character  of most  phenomena.  The  fact  that  a phenomenon  can-
not be explained  by a single cause does not  mean,  of course,  that  the  very 
notion  of  causality  should  be  rejected;  but  the  simultaneous  action  of  a 
great number  of  factors  means  that  causality  tests  pertaining  to  one  of 
these factors  have to be carried  out  very carefully. The matter  has received 
considerable  attention  in  recent  decades  on  the  part  of  econometricians. 
Ever since the pioneering  papers  of Granger  (1969),  several multifactorial 
causality tests have been developed.  Even in a field like modern  economics, 
however, where accurate  time  series are available, the results of several dec-
ades of causality testing  have been rather  disappointing.  In a review paper 
written  in  1988, Zellner observes:  "With  all the work  in  the  past  two  dec-
ades on  definitions  of  causality  and  tests  for  causality,  it  may  be  asked 
'How many new causal economic  laws have been produced  by this work?' I 
believe that  an honest  answer is: 'Not a single one.'" 
The reason  for  these  difficulties  could  be  ascribed  to  the  fact  that,  in 
Zellner's words,  models  are  either  too  broad  or  too  narrow.  If  they  are 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 29 ===
16 Analytical  History 
broad,  that  is,  if they  involve many  variables,  then  causality  tests become 
technically very tricky and hazardous  even when performed  on fairly  long 
time series. If the model  is rather  narrow,  it may well overlook one (or  sev-
eral) significant  variables, and this  omission  may  lead to incorrect  conclu-
sions. 
We may also look at the question  of causality from  a more general view-
point.  Here  we will essentially  follow  the  analysis of  Veyne (1984).  Con-
cerning the  symbolic  example  of  the  fall  of an  apple,  Veyne stresses that 
one would search in vain for a reply to the question:  why did this apple fall 
at this  particular  moment?  In  fact,  depending  on  the  perspective  adopted, 
many replies are possible. The apple had become  too heavy; the stem of the 
apple had by drying  become  brittle;  there  has been a gust of wind and  the 
branch  has  been  shaken,  and  so  on.  One  would  try  in  vain,  concludes 
Veyne, to give a detailed account  of the fall of the apple, but never discover 
the attraction  that  is  the common  cause  not  only  of the  fall  of apples  but 
also of the  fall  of pine  cones  or  of  water drops.  At most  one  would  reach 
the truism  that  unsupported  objects  fall. But if one passes from  the ques-
tion "why?" to the  question  "how?"  then the  way is opened  that  can  allow 
one to  discover  that  there  is  a  universal  law  behind  the  fall  of  various 
objects. 
In addition  to  these  fundamental  difficulties  there are also practical  ob-
stacles. For multifactorial  phenomena  there  is  usually  no  objective  crite-
rion to  decide  whether  one  cause  is more  important  than  another.  What 
were the causes of the Civil War in the United  States? There  are an infinite 
number  of  answers to such a question;  whether  one  prefers  one set of an-
swers to another  is just a matter  of personal  taste. 
Bridging the  Gap between Micro-  and  Macrosociology 
Sometimes it is possible to identify  mechanisms at the microlevel that  have 
implications  at  the  macrolevel.  As an  illustration  consider  the  following 
problem.  As far as state formation  is concerned,  the nineteenth  century  has 
seen two opposite  movements.  On the  one hand,  a number  of empires  and 
kingdoms  have  disintegrated:  the  Spanish,  Ottoman,  Austro-Hungarian 
empires, and the  Danish  kingdom.  On the  other  hand,  a number  of  sepa-
rate entities  have coalesced into  new  states, for example, Germany  and  It-
aly. How  can  we  explain  those  opposite  changes?  There  is  an  interesting 
explanation  at  the microsocial  level, namely, the shift  from  religion to lan-
guage as the defining  principle  of a state. The empires  and  kingdoms  that 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 30 ===
Analytical  History  17 
disintegrated  were multilinguistic  entities  held together  by a common  reli-
gion: Catholicism  for  the Spanish  and  Austro-Hungarian  empires,  Protes-
tantism  for  the Danish  kingdom,  Islam for  the Ottoman  Empire.  The new 
states, on the  contrary,  had a  single language and,  in the  case of Germany, 
had long  been deeply  divided by religious issues. 
We have here an example  of a change at the microsociological  level that 
brought  about  macrohistorical  transformations.  Such  explanations  are 
particularly  attractive  because  microsociological  phenomena  often  are not 
restricted  to  just  one  country;  they  thus  present  ideal  opportunities  for 
comparative  analysis.  But  while  there  has  been  a  sustained  interest  for 
comparative  methods  in the  past decades, actual progress  has been slow. It 
is the purpose  of the next paragraph  to examine  why. 
Obstacles to the Development of  Comparative Analysis 
In our  opinion  the  main  obstacle  to the development  of comparative  anal-
ysis is the lack of adequate  sources.  Let us illustrate  this  point  by an exam-
ple. In 1997 there were riots in Indonesia  between  ethnic  Chinese and Java-
nese. The clashes were by no means  the first of that  sort.  Similar riots  have 
occurred  repeatedly  in  Indonesia  since  1945  and  even  before  indepen-
dence. Suppose  we  want  to  make  a  precise  study  of  such  incidents.  On 
which source can we rely? On the  Times  or on the  New York  Times? Clearly 
these papers  had  no  reason  to  report  small-scale  riots  in Indonesia.  Since 
the country  is  a former  Dutch  colony, we have a better  chance  of  finding 
the information  in a Dutch newspaper.  But then  one  has to be able to read 
Dutch or  to  find  a  Dutch  collaborator.  Even assuming  that  this  practical 
problem  has been solved, without  the help of an index it will take a consid-
erable amount  of work to extract  these  events from  the daily press. 
From this  example  one  can  better  understand  why  so  many  micro-
sociological studies  undertaken  in the United States focus on either  Britain 
or the United  States, two countries  for which there  are convenient  newspa-
per indexes.  Generally  there  are  few  sources arranged  in  a  cross-national 
perspective; chronologies  are  almost  the  only  systematic  sources  of  this 
sort. 
In history  there  has  been even less comparative  work  than  in  sociology. 
Academic and psychological obstacles seem to play an important  role  here. 
Currently  one of the main  criteria  with  which to judge the value of a piece 
of research  in  history  is  the  number  and  variety  of  the  archival  sources 
used. Such  a  criterion  constitutes  a  considerable  barrier  to  the  develop-
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 31 ===
18 Analytical  History 
ment of comparative  studies  to the  extent  that  it is hardly possible,  if only 
because of  the  difficulties  of language  and  time,  to  work  on  the  archival 
sources of,  say, ten countries.  It  is a little as if one  asked  an  economist  to 
carry out personally  the surveys and statistical  studies  on which his mathe-
matical model  is dependent.  Comparative  history  will be hampered  unless 
it is recognized as a separate discipline,  with its own criteria  for evaluation. 
In sociology, the situation  is a little more  favorable,  but the  conclusions  of 
Archer and  Gartner  (1984)  show  that  much  ground  still  needs  to be  cov-
ered. Concerning  the  psychological obstacles, we think  especially of the al-
most emotional  bond  that  often  exists between a  historian  and  his subject 
of study. For example,  if an American  or  English historian  chooses  north-
ern Italy as his subject  of study, that supposes  a familiarity  with the  Italian 
language as  well as frequent  sojourns  in  the  country  to  work  in  libraries 
and archives.  There  is  nothing  similar  in  comparative  research.  The  re-
searcher will be faced with ten, perhaps  twenty  cases distributed  across dif-
ferent countries  and  various  historical  periods.  Personal  familiarity  with 
the languages, the cultures,  or the people  is impossible. Note, however, that 
in this  respect  the  situation  also  occurs  in  the  natural  sciences;  when  a 
chemist chooses  to  study  organic-phosphoric  compounds,  this  is  most 
likely not because  he feels a particular  affinity  for these products. 
The Best Predictor for Tomorrow Is Yesterday 
In this  section's  title,  the  term  "predictor"  is used in  the  sense  defined  by 
Tilly. It does  not  refer  to a  prediction  "ex  nihilo";  rather,  if a sequence  of 
events (a  strike  or  an  uprising,  for  instance)  starts  then  we  claim that  we 
can more  or less predict the form  it will take. Two other qualifications  have 
to be made.  First, the statement  "the  best predictor  for  tomorrow  is yester-
day" applies only to modules,  that  is to say, to simple phenomena.  In a gen-
eral way the simpler  the  event the  better  the  prediction.  Second, the state-
ment does  not  apply  if there  is  a  major  change  in  the  social  or  political 
environment.  For example, in New Zealand the Maori  resistance to coloni-
zation, though  still active, cannot  assume  the forms  (that  is, open warfare) 
it had  in  the  nineteenth  century;  in  this  case what  has  changed  dramati-
cally is the  firepower  of  the  army.  These qualifications  should  be  kept  in 
mind  throughout  this  section. 
Once a  phenomenon  has  been  decomposed  into  simpler  episodes,  it 
usually appears  that  there  is  a  strong  similarity  between  episodes  of  the 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 32 ===
Analytical  History  19 
same sort.  Why? This  is the first  question  that  we  have to  discuss.  It will 
lead us  to  examine  the  notion  of  imitation  (at  an  individual  or  collective 
level), the constraints  imposed  by tradition,  and  the  role  played by collec-
tive historical  memory. 
Paronymy, Imitation,  Repertoire 
History  never  repeats  itself exactly. Even for  simple  episodes,  an  event  A 
and an event Β  are never identical  but only similar. To describe this form  of 
similarity  we use the  word  "paronymic,"  a technical  term  taken  from  the 
field of linguistics.  Two words  are  paronymic  if  their  spellings  differ  only 
by one  or  two  letters;  for  example  "collision"  and  "collusion"  are  two 
paronymic  words,  "graduation"  and  "gradation"  is another  example.  No-
tice that  the  meaning  of the words is of no matter. 
The expression  "paronymic  episodes"  implies two  notions  that  are  well 
suited to  our  purpose.  First,  as already mentioned,  it  means  that  the  epi-
sodes are not  completely  identical  but  only  similar. Second, it conveys the 
idea that  we are not  interested  in  the  political  meaning  of  an  episode  but 
only in its  form.  In recent  years the  notion  of  paronymic  events  has  been 
introduced  through  a  number  of  case studies  (Roehner  1993,  1997a,b).  It 
differs from  the  notion  of  imitation  introduced  by  Snooks  (1996,  1997) 
mainly by the fact that it refers to collective (and more  or less unconscious) 
forms  of imitation. 
IMITATION 
Imitation  is one of the main notions  on which Snooks's powerful  trilogy 
(1996,1997,1998)  is  based. To our knowledge  it is the first attempt  of such 
scope and  magnitude  to  use  that  concept  in  a  systematic  way. He writes: 
"Imitation  is the major  shaping  force in life" (1997, p. 124); "The great ma-
jority  of  individuals  make  decisions  through  imitation  of  those  who  are 
demonstrably  successful"  (p. 4); "This decision-making  mechanism  has  its 
origin in earlier animal  forms"  (p. 11); "If members  of a group  are feeding 
on a  new  food  source  without  suffering  any ill  effects,  then follow  their 
lead .  . . We prefer to make  choices that  economize  on  the  most  scarce re-
source in nature,  the intellect"  (p. 112). 
A telling  illustration  of  imitation  behavior  in  the  animal  world  is  pro-
vided by the Antarctic  tern.  This gull pulls  almost  all of its food  from  the 
sea; it swallows fishes after  having picked them  up  by the head,  a method 
that makes  sense  because  the  fish's  head  is  the  largest  part  of  its  body. 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 33 ===
20 Analytical  History 
These gulls also attack  small  penguins  after  their  birth.  If one  closely ob-
serves such a scene, one notices  that  the  gull tries  to apply  to the  penguin 
the method  that  succeeds so well with fish; but because  the  body  of a pen-
guin is larger than  the  gull's head, the bird  is obliged to release its prey. To 
overcome this problem  the  gulls work in twos, one on either  side, and even 
then they  are obliged to peck at the meat with their  beaks; their clumsiness 
is glaring. The point  we will retain is that, confronted  with a new situation, 
the animal's  first reflex is to apply methods  that  have been well tried in the 
past. It is only in the  case of obvious  failure  that  these  will be renounced, 
but in  this  case the development  of  an efficient  and new  procedure  will in 
general be a long-term  affair.  Notice that  in  this  example  the  animal  imi-
tates not  other  members  of  its  group  but  rather  its  own former  behavior. 
In other  words  it  is  closer  to  the  notion  of  paronymy.  Compared  with 
Snooks's imitation  concept,  the  latter  notion  adds  a  social dimension.  To 
explain the  similarity  between  the  general  strikes  in  France  in  1936  and 
1968, imitation  at  an individual  level seems inadequate.  Before examining 
the sociohistorical  forces  that  shape  paronymic  behavior  at  the  level of a 
community,  we want to discuss the question  of collective behavior  in more 
detail. 
INDIVIDUAL  CHOICE  VERSUS  COLLECTIVE  BEHAVIOR 
Individual  choice  theories  are  attractive  for  at  least  two  reasons.  First, 
since everybody has to make decisions, the process of individual  choice has 
a strong  intuitive  appeal.  Second,  rational  choice  models  can  be  formu-
lated in a clear and  well-defined  way. Economics has a century-long  tradi-
tion in  this  respect;  in recent  decades  there  has also been impressive  prog-
ress along this line in sociology, as in Hechter's  work (1994,1997,1999). 
In contrast  the  analysis  of  collective  behavior  is  hindered  by  the  fact 
that, as individuals,  we do not  have a clear perception  of the  many  collec-
tive factors  that affect  our decisions.  Furthermore,  when it comes to math-
ematical formulation  one  faces  a difficult  challenge.  Satisfactory  mathe-
matical models  are available only for the simplest  forms  of interaction.  Yet 
these models  (for  example,  the  models  for  phase  transition  in  physics) 
have shown convincingly  that  the  behavior  of a group  can be dramatically 
different  from what could be expected at an individual  level. The transition 
from  water to ice specifically is a collective behavior;  it does not  make  any 
sense at the level of individual  molecules. 
That the  framework  of individual  choice  theory  is too narrow  has been 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 34 ===
Analytical  History  21 
demonstrated  by  several  influential  sociologists.  First  it  can  be  recalled 
that all of Durkheim's  work  stressed  the  importance  of  group  representa-
tion and  collective consciousness;  both  develop  through  the  interaction  of 
many minds. 
In a 1999 paper  Goldstone  provides  a compelling  argument  pointing  in 
the same direction.  Let us recall it briefly. Tullock (1971) showed that  if in-
dividuals made  separate  choices  as  to  whether  to  join  a  revolutionary 
movement,  and  if  (as  is  usually  the  case)  the  benefits  of  the  revolution 
went to everyone and not  just to those  who rioted,  then revolutions  would 
be impossible.  Individuals  would  not  have  any incentive  to  incur  risks  by 
taking an  active  part  if  they  could  enjoy  the  benefits  of  the  revolution 
whether  or not they participated;  if every individual  calculated in this fash-
ion, revolutionary  mobilization  could  not  occur.  Not surprisingly,  econo-
mists championed  Tullock's result  as a triumph  of  logic. Yet, since revolu-
tions do  in  fact  occur,  one  has  to  find  out  what  is  wrong  in  Tullock's 
argument.  Goldstone  (1994)  showed  that  one  of  his  premises  was  faulty. 
"Individuals  do  not  decide  to join,  or not  join,  revolutionary  movements 
as isolated  individuals."  Instead,  they  decide  "as  part  of  groups  to  which 
they have prior  commitments"  (Goldstone  1999).  This leads us to analyze 
the role of social constraints. 
THE  WEIGHT  OF  SOCIAL  CONSTRAINTS 
Snooks is also well aware of the  many  connections  between  an  individ-
ual's mind  and  his  social environment.  This  is especially clear in  his  case 
studies; thus  about  ancient  Greece  he  writes,  "Greek  religion  was  an  or-
dered and  rational  social activity  that  supported  the  merchant's  desire  for 
peace and  prosperity.  It  can  be  contrasted  with  the  religions  of  conquest 
societies that  emphasize  the  darker  and  more  chaotic  forces  in  human 
imagination  ...  The  Olympic  games also helped  to imprint  the  commerce 
strategy on the community  consciousness"  (Snooks  1997, p. 230). This in-
deed is a very "Durkheimian"  perspective. 
To sum up,  there is a permanent  osmosis  between the  human  mind  and 
social influences  such as tradition,  religion,  geographical  and  institutional 
constraints,  and so on. Here we shall just give two microsociological  exam-
ples. Although of minor  importance  by themselves, they are quite revealing 
of the  role  played by  tradition  and  collective historical  memory.  The  first 
example concerns  the  meeting  of  the  Council  of  Ministers  in  France;  it 
takes place on Wednesday mornings.  Is it not surprising  that  under  the  an-
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 35 ===
22 Analytical  History 
cien regime  the  king's  council  also met  on  Wednesday  mornings  (Marion 
1976 [1929]).  Notwithstanding  several revolutions  and  changes  of consti-
tutions  a  three-century-old  custom  has  survived.  As another  example  of 
the homeostasis  of  institutions,  consider  the  tax  on  playing  cards  in 
France. Like so many others  this tax was abolished  in 1790. Yet it was rees-
tablished in stages, first in 1797, then in 1804. What is interesting  to note  is 
that the  new regulation  was almost an exact copy of the ancien rögime reg-
ulation of 1751: a requirement  that  the  manufacturers  use only paper pro-
vided by the administration,  a requirement  to  make  castings  in the  offices 
of the administration,  the same formalities  for the packaging  of each game 
by the  manufacturer,  and  so  on;  other  details  are  given in  Stourm  (1885, 
2:121). Note that  the  images on the  cards themselves were modified  by the 
Revolution, kings and queens  being replaced by figures from  ancient times; 
thereafter  there was a return  to  the traditional  images. 
We now discuss  a factor  that  helps  us  understand  why  societies are  re-
luctant  to innovate. 
A COMPLEX  TASK  MADE  EASIER  THROUGH  REPETITION 
So far we have highlighted  the  role  of social representations  in  individ-
ual behavior;  because of their  permanence,  social representations  certainly 
contribute  to  the  paronymic  character  of  recurrent  events.  Now  we  de-
scribe another  factor  which, though  often  overlooked, establishes a link be-
tween paronymic  repetition  and  the  principle  of  least effort;  as we know 
from  Zipf's  (1972 [1949])  work  this principle  most  likely plays a great role 
in human  behavior.  In short,  a complex task can be executed faster, better, 
and with  less effort  when it is repeated several times. What do  we mean by 
a "complex  task"? Moving  an army  across the Atlantic  is no doubt  a  com-
plex task. But our  present  argument  also applies to microsociological  tasks 
that look  far  less impressive.  For  instance,  organizing  a  large demonstra-
tion is by no means  a simple business. It involves steps that  include  (1) ob-
taining  the required  authorization  from municipal  authorities;  (2) writing, 
producing,  and  distributing  pamphlets;  (3)  getting  in  touch  with  the  par-
ties, unions,  or local committees  that  may support  the  demonstration;  and 
(4) calling on the  people,  for example,  through  cars  with loudspeakers,  to 
demonstrate.  For  an  inexperienced  group  this  amounts  to  an  almost  im-
possible mission.  Frequent  repetition,  however,  can  bring  about  a  high 
level of competence;  a spectacular  illustration  is given by the French  colo-
nists in Algiers, a case discussed later in this chapter. It is important  to note 
that, once  again,  the  competence  is  a collective one;  not  only  must  every 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 36 ===
Analytical  History  23 
participant  know  his own task, but, above all, participants  must  be able to 
work together. 
Repetition  is the basic principle  in the  training  of armies.  Here we have 
one of the  best examples  of a complex task involving a large organization. 
This, incidentally, is why much  this  book  is devoted to an  analysis of war-
fare. In military  matters,  while exercises and  maneuvers  are  obviously  im-
portant,  the  best  training  is provided  by  the  repetition  of  real operations. 
Thus between  March  1938  and May  1941, the German  invasion  of Russia 
was preceded by a series of "repetitions,"  by which we mean invasions  on a 
smaller scale: Austria (March  1938), Czechoslovakia (March  1939), Poland 
(September 1939),  Denmark-Belgium-France  (June  1940),  and  Yugosla-
via-Greece (May 1941). Each repetition  improved  the  army's performance. 
Similarly the Allied landing  in Normandy  in  June 1944 was preceded  by  a 
series of  repetitions:  North  Africa  (November  1942),  Sicily (June  1943), 
Calabria (September  1943).  There is no doubt  that  these  repetitions  in in-
creasingly difficult  terrains  substantially  improved  the technique  of the op-
eration. 
The expected benefit  from  successive repetitions  can be estimated  quan-
titatively. In the field of operations  research it is well known that,  at least in 
the start-up  phase, the completion  of a complex task requires  less time as it 
is performed  again and  again.  Typically it takes only half as much  time  to 
perform  a task for the tenth  time  as it took for the first (Figure 1.4). On av-
erage, the time  required  decreases as l/«0  3, where η  is the number  of times 
the task  has been  performed.  Repetition  also  has important  psychological 
implications.  The  first time  one  has  to perform  a given task  one  is rather 
reluctant  to  undertake  it,  perhaps  for  fear of failing.  Then after  a number 
of repetitions,  fear  and reluctance  disappear  and  are  replaced  instead  by a 
feeling of pleasure  and  confidence.  The feeling  of confidence  is quite  un-
derstandable  in so far as, even before  settling down to the  job, one is men-
tally able to review its successive steps; it is almost as if the job were already 
done. 
"MEN  GAIN  LITTLE  PROFIT  FROM  THE  LESSONS  OF  HISTORY" 
Snooks and others  have emphasized  that  individuals  have a tendency  to 
imitate those  "who  are  demonstrably  successful."  But at  a collective level, 
strange as it may seem, groups  have a marked  tendency  to repeat  even un-
successful episodes.  This  can  be  demonstrated  by  using  examples  from 
separatist  struggles;  the  Algerians,  Hungarians,  Irish,  Maoris  have  recur-
rently fought  losing battles, and arguably  they had little choice. Yet even in 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 37 ===
24 Analytical  History 
Cumulative output: number of items 
Figure 1.4 The  learning curve. When the manufacturing of a new and complex 
item (for example, an airplane) begins, the time required for its production de-
creases steadily as more and more items are produced; from the beginning of the 
so-called start-up phase to the end, production time can be divided by four. This 
graph shows a case where the production time is inversely proportional to a 
power function of the number of items produced; the exponent is taken as equal 
to 0.3, a figure commonly observed in the aeronautical industry (BalofF 1971). 
cases where one  could  expect  fairly  rational  decisions,  the same  errors  are 
repeated over and over again; in Aldous Huxley's words, "the fact that men 
gain little  profit  from  the  lessons  of history  is the  most  important  lesson 
that history  teaches us." This can be illustrated  by Hitler's  strategic  choices 
in World  War  II.  On  April  17,  1923, in a  speech  in  Munich,  he  analyzed 
Germany's errors  during  the  course  of  the  World  War  I  in  the  following 
manner:  "Even on  3  August 1914  it was thought  that  England  would  re-
main neutral.  What  enormous  damage  Germany  suffered  from  that  mis-
take. Then there  was the illusion  about  Russia; it was said that  Russia was a 
corrupt  state  and was in no position  to wage a war. One blow and it would 
collapse. Thirdly there  was the illusion about  Italy. Ludendorff  had already 
in 1912  pointed  out  that  Italy  was of  no  value  at  all  as  an  ally"  (Baynes 
1942). However, the  perceptiveness  of  his  analysis would  still  not  prevent 
him from  committing  point  by  point  the  same  errors  less  than  twenty 
years later: England's entry  into the war; misjudgment  of Russia's potential 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 38 ===
Analytical  History  25 
for struggle  and,  as its corollary,  a war on  two  fronts,  the worst  nightmare 
of the  German  General  Staff,  and finally the  defection  of Italy. 
In Search  of  Fossils 
"In search  of recurrent  events"  would  have  been  a  more  conventional  title 
for this  section.  Yet we believe that  the  parallel  with  paleontology  can  be a 
valuable  guide. 
A PARALLEL  BETWEEN  PALEONTOLOGY  AND  HISTORICAL  SOCIOLOGY 
A paleontologist's  work  can  be  said  to  have  two  separate  steps.  For  the 
purposes  of  illustration  let  us  consider  the  case  of  the  evolution  of  the 
modern  horse.  The  first step  is to break  up  the  problem  of  the  horse's  evo-
lution  into  a  number  of  subproblems:  the  evolution  of  the  skull,  the  jaw, 
the teeth,  and so on.  The second  step  is to investigate  the  evolution  of these 
elements  and  to  find adequate  fossils. 
As a historical  event  the  French  Revolution  is  unique  in  the  same  sense 
that  the  horse  is unique  as an animal  species.  But horses  did  not  appear  all 
of a  sudden;  they  had  ancestors:  Eohippus,  Mesohippus,  Merychippus.  In 
the same  way  historical  events  can  be  traced  back  to  a  number  of  prece-
dents  and  forerunners.  A complex  event  such  as  the  Revolution  of  1789  is 
of course  made  up  of  a  number  of  components  and  strata.  In  much  the 
same way  that  a  paleontologist  would  study  the  evolution  of  the  horse's 
skull or teeth,  we can consider  a number  of  separate  elements  of the  Revo-
lution:  the storming  of the Bastille, the meeting  of the  Estates-General,  and 
so on.  These  building  blocks  are  the  analogues  of the  horse's  skull  or teeth. 
What  we want  to  discover  is whether  there  are  earlier  fossils  and what  they 
look like. 
What  can  be gained  from  such a perspective?  Let us say right away that  it 
will not  necessarily  give us better  insight  into  the  future.  After all, the fos-
sils of  the  horse  do  not  give  us  any  indication  about  its  future  evolution. 
But at least these  social "fossils"  will make these  events  appear  more  plausi-
ble, more  natural.  Instead  of  being  "creationists,"  historians  will  become 
"evolutionists."  The  parallel  with  paleontology  will now  help  us  to explain 
why the  objectives  of analytical  history  are far less ambitious  than  those  of 
"standard  history." 
THE  MODESTY  OF  ANALYTICAL  HISTORY'S  GOALS 
It may  seem  that  studying  the  previous  meetings  of  the  Estates-General 
without  connecting  them  to  other  events  is a fairly  artificial  and unrealistic 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 39 ===
26 Analytical  History 
approach.  Yet this  is  precisely  what  the  paleontologist  does.  He  recon-
structs  sequences  showing  the  evolution  of specific elements, for  example, 
the molars,  the  jaw, the  forefeet.  Certainly  there  is  a connection  between 
the evolution  of the molar  and the  evolution  of the jaw or even of the fore-
feet. Obviously for  the molar  to  become  bigger in the  course  of evolution, 
there has  to  be  a parallel  growth  in  the  size of the  jaw. There  is probably 
also a relationship  between  changes  in the size of the molar  and  the  evolu-
tion of  the  forefeet;  but this  relationship  is  by no  means  an  obvious  one. 
Questions  of  this  kind  are  structural  problems  and  usually  very  difficult 
ones. It is precisely because these questions  are largely out of his reach that 
the paleontologist  concentrates  his attention  and  efforts  on an easier prob-
lem, namely the reconstruction  of separate  sequences. 
In contrast,  one of the main  purposes  of history  is to study  the connec-
tions between  separate  elements,  such  as the impact  of  street  riots  on  the 
power struggle  in  the  Estates-General,  or  the  consequences  of  the  king's 
execution on  the  subsequent  development  of  the  Revolution.  These  are 
structural  questions  and  they  are very difficult  to answer  satisfactorily.  To 
answer them  one  needs  nothing  less  than  a  theory  of  revolution.  In  the 
same way, in order  to answer his own structural  questions  the  paleontolo-
gist will need a global model  of the horse's evolution. 
Far from  being  overly  ambitious,  the  objective  of  analytical  history  is 
quite within  our  capabilities.  In  contrast,  when  "traditional"  history  tries 
to explain  (instead  of  just  describing)  a  succession  of  events,  it  embarks 
upon  an  almost  impossible  task. 
SMALL  VERSUS  BIG  EVENTS 
"Small" events are likely to recur  more  frequently  and  in  more  identical 
forms  than  "bigger"  ones.  Let us  illustrate  this  idea  with  a  riddle.  Where 
and when  did  the  following  episode  occur?  "He  was  killed  by  an  angry 
crowd, and his head,  stuck on a pike, was paraded  in triumph  through  the 
city." That  description  could  well  apply  to  the  scene  that  followed  the 
storming  of the  Bastille, when  the  governor  of  the  Bastille was killed and 
his head  paraded  through  the  streets.  Yet that  excerpt  in  fact  refers to an 
episode that  occurred  in  Kosovo  almost  a  century  after  the  storming  of 
the Bastille;  the  person  killed  was  an  Ottoman  marshal  (Malcolm  1998, 
p. 223). Indeed,  parading  the  head  of a vanquished  enemy  was a common 
practice throughout  Europe,  from  Britain  to  Albania.  Not  only  are  such 
episodes very similar but  they  have also happened  fairly  frequently  (Figure 
1.5a,b). 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 40 ===
Analytical  History  27 
How often did it happen? 
2 
Number of 
Occurrences 
French Revolution 
Storming of the Bastille 
Meeting of the Estates-General 15 
Parading of governor's head 100f 
Figure 1.5a How  often  did it happen? The French Revolution can be seen as a 
complex assemblage of  different elements. As a whole, it happened  only  once, but 
some of its modules  have occurred several, and sometimes  many, times. Generally 
speaking, the smaller a module the more frequently it will be observed. For in-
stance, parading the head of a vanquished enemy  was common  practice in Eu-
rope and may have been observed hundreds of times. 
The preceding  example has a noteworthy  consequence  for  analytical his-
tory. Suppose  I  want  to  write  a  book  about  the  way  people  paraded  the 
heads of  their  enemies.  From  the  point  of  view  of  comparative  analysis, 
one would  be in an ideal situation;  with about  a hundred  occurrences  this 
indeed would  be  a  "large  N"  analysis.  But  it  is  doubtful  whether  such  a 
topic would  interest  many  readers;  most  likely it would  be  difficult  if not 
impossible to  find  a  publisher  for  such a  book.  In  other  words,  a reason-
able compromise  has  to be found  for  selecting  the  modules.  They  should 
not be too  microscopic,  but  at  the same  time  there  should  be a fairly large 
number  of occurrences. 
If the search for  fossils has so far received only  little attention  from  aca-
demic historians,  it has been used extensively in politics,  as we shall see. 
Use and  Abuse  of  Historical Analogies  in  Politics 
Reasoning by analogy and comparison  turns  out  to be common  practice  in 
the making  of political  decisions.  Political leaders  are tempted  to  scan the 
past for  situations  bearing  some  similarity  to  those  with  which  they  are 
confronted.  In so  doing  they  implicitly  recognize  that  the  past  can  be  an 
acceptable predictor  for  the future.  Several twentieth-century  world  lead-
ers (for  example,  Winston  Churchill,  Charles  de  Gaulle)  have  had  an  ex-
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 41 ===
28 Analytical  History 
1789 May 
Estates-
General 
1789-July 14 
Fall of 
Bastille 
1789-Nov. 2 
Sale of 
Church 
property 
w § 
υ w 
1614 
α 
u3 
t>0 .3 c ο 
1588 
% CQ £ 
U-c ο «5 SO 
3 (Λ 
1588-May 14 
1413-Apr. 28 
1560 
1777-1786 
Austria 
Josephism 
& α 
1 Ö 
Ί3 ς/3 
1641-1652 
Civil War 
England 
1528-1537 
England 
Henry VIII 
Figure 1.5b Antecedents  of  some  of  the  modules  of  the  French Revolution.  The 
chart displays three events  that occurred  in 1789,  along  with  some  of  their ante-
cedents. The dates for the meetings  of  the Estates-General  refer to France, but 
there were similar assemblies  in other  countries  throughout  western  Europe. The 
confiscation  and sale of Church  estates had not  previously  occurred  in France, 
but had taken place repeatedly  in other  European  countries,  particularly  at the 
time of the  Reformation. 
tensive knowledge of history.  But using historical  analogies is a tricky busi-
ness. While the tool may have been used effectively by a few masters, in the 
hand of other  leaders it has proved deceptive and misleading;  this has been 
shown in a pioneering  study  by May (1973) and  subsequently  in two other 
studies by Neustadt  and  May (1986) and  Khong  (1992). 
As an  illustrative  example  let  us  consider  the  decisions  leading  to  the 
Korean, Vietnam,  and Gulf wars. In his memoirs,  President  Harry  Truman 
explains the  American  intervention  in  Korea  in  the  following  way: "I re-
membered  how  each time that the  democracies  failed to act, it had encour-
aged the  aggressor  to  keep  going  ahead.  Communism  had  acted  in  Korea 
just as Hitler, Mussolini  and  the  Japanese had  acted  10,15  or 20 years ear-
lier" (Neustadt  and  May  1986).  Subsequently  the  Korean  analogy  was in-
voked to justify  the intervention  in  Vietnam.  Khong (1992) made  a precise 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 42 ===
Analytical  History  29 
count of  the  number  of  times  specific  analogies  had  been  used  both  in 
public speeches and  in private reports  by the Johnson administration  (Ta-
ble 1.3).  On  both  counts  Korea ranks first. The private reports  are  of  spe-
cial interest, since they show that analogies were not used only for commu-
nication purposes;  they  were used  in  the  decision-making  process  itself. 
The analogy with the French Vietnam war (a  war that ended in disaster for 
the French)  was  employed  almost  exclusively in  private  reports.  Even  in 
these it  was only used half  as often as  the analogy  with Korea,  in  spite of 
the fact that it could certainly be expected to prove more accurate  than any 
link to Korea, a country  more  than 4,000  kilometers away. A similar exam-
ple is  provided by  the  Gulf  War (January-February  1991).  For  President 
Bush the  appropriate  analogy  was Hitler in  the late 1930s,  the  Rhineland, 
Austria, and Czechoslovakia (Yergin 1991). 
In the  previous  cases  both  the  selection  of  the  analogies  and  the  way 
they were  used  were  fairly  unsophisticated.  First,  these  analogies  were 
drawn exclusively from  the  recent  history  of  Western countries.  The  his-
tory of  the  conflicts  between  Korea  and  Japan  or  between  Vietnam  and 
China was completely ignored. Second, one may wonder if it made sense to 
compare North  Korea or Iraq to Germany. In 1949  North  Korea had a pop-
ulation of  only 9 million,  and  Iraq  had  16  million  in  1990;  in  1939  Ger-
Table 1.3 Analogies  most  frequently  used  in preparing  the  Vietnam  decisions 
of 1965 
In public Number  of In private Number  of 
speeches times used reports times used 
Korea 63 Korea 46 
1930s 42 French  Indochinese  War 26 
Greece 33 Malaysia 12 
Malaysia 22 1930s 10 
Berlin blockade 19 Greece 8 
Philippines 15 Philippines 6 
Cuba 14 World  War  II 5 
Turkey 10 Berlin blockade 4 
World  War  II 9 Cuba 3 
Germany 8 Turkey 2 
Source: Khong (1992). 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 43 ===
30 Analytical  History 
many, in contrast,  had a population  of over 70 million, and a GNP that was 
surpassed only  by that of the United  States. 
A closer examination  shows  that  if  politicians  have managed  poorly  in 
using analogies it is in fact  because only  poor  information  has been avail-
able to  them.  As a case in  point  let  us  consider  the  Vietnam  War.  If one 
makes the  reasonable  assumption  that  the  best  analogies  for  the Vietnam 
War were the wars waged previously  by the Vietnamese  people  themselves, 
one is led to wonder  about  the  quality  of the information  provided  on  this 
subject by American historians.  An examination  of the resources  of a large 
American university  library  (Harvard's  Lamont  Library)  reveals that only a 
small proportion  (on  the  order  of  5  percent)  of  the  books  relating  to  the 
Vietnam War granted  the  slightest attention  to the successive wars that  the 
Vietnamese waged  against  the  French,  the  Japanese,  and  then  the  French 
again; as for the  numerous  struggles  that  they  sustained  against  China  in 
the sixteenth,  seventeenth,  and  eighteenth  centuries  not  more  than  a  few 
lines were  found.  It  is  therefore  highly  likely  that  the  information  that 
should have been put  at the disposal  of policymakers  was simply not avail-
able. 
That foreign  policy is not the  only area in which comparative  analysis is 
used poorly  is  illustrated  by  the  following  example.  In  the  area  of  public 
health,  the question  of the decriminalization  of  so-called soft  drugs recurs 
from  time  to  time.  The  question  is  whether  or  not  decriminalization  can 
lead to  a  reduction  in  the  consumption  of  drugs,  whether  soft  or  hard. 
Usually the public  authorities  set  up  a  commission  of  experts  comprising 
physicians, jurists,  police officers,  and so  on; these people  then  discuss  the 
various  facets  of the  problem  as  they see it. An alternative  approach  con-
sists in  noting  that  for  the  last  twenty  years  or  so,  soft  drugs  have  been 
decriminalized  in  a  number  of  countries,  for  instance  in  Spain  and  the 
Netherlands.  It is therefore  possible to observe the response  to decriminal-
ization. Such a comparative  approach  is used only infrequently. 
To What Extent  Does  History Repeat  Itself  ? Some Examples 
So far we have assumed  the  existence of historical  fossils; or, stated differ-
ently, we have supposed  that,  at least to some  extent,  history  repeats  itself. 
It is one of the main  purposes  of the  subsequent  chapters  to examine  that 
question  in detail.  Here a few examples are considered  in  order  to give the 
reader a quick overview. The study  of recurrent  events  uses both  historical 
(longitudinal)  and  cross-national  (transversal)  analysis,  as  illustrated  in 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 44 ===
Analytical  History  31 
Longitudinal analysis 
Ireland Ireland Ireland Ireland 
1641 1798 1848 1916 
Cross-national analysis 
Figure 1.6 Chronological  (longitudinal)  and  cross-national  (transversal)  analysis. 
The chart refers to the example  of  separatist uprisings  in Ireland. Longitudinal 
analysis compares  events  that happened  at different  moments  in  the history  of a 
given country:  1641,1798,1848,1916  are  the dates of successive  Irish uprisings. 
In cross-national  analysis,  one  compares  similar events  that occurred  in different 
countries.  For instance,  1798,1770,  and  1841  were three "failed" uprisings in Ire-
land, Greece, and Bulgaria, respectively; 1916,1821,  and  1876,  in contrast,  are the 
dates of three "successful" uprisings in the same  countries  in the sense  that these 
events led to the nation's independence  within  a few years. 
Figure  1.6.  Roughly  speaking,  three  levels of growing  sophistication  can  be 
distinguished:  enumerative  studies,  qualitative  studies,  and  quantitative 
studies.  An enumerative  study  simply  lists  a number  of  events  of  the  same 
kind.  What  can  be  the  value  of  such  a  review?  To know  that  an  event,  far 
from  being  exceptional  or  unique,  in  fact  has a number  of  antecedents  can 
make  a  significant  difference.  By way of  illustration,  one  can  observe  that 
the assassination  of  Archduke  Francis  Ferdinand  on  June  28,  1914,  in 
Sarajevo  was not,  despite  its  immense  consequences,  an  exceptional  event 
in this  period;  on  the  contrary,  political  assassinations  were  very  much  in 
fashion:  1911  had  seen  the  assassination  of  the  prime  minister  of  Russia, 
1912 that  of  the  prime  minister  of  Spain,  while  in 1913  the  prime  minister 
of Salvador,  the  president  of  Mexico,  and  the  king  of  Greece  were  assassi-
nated  (World  Almanac and  Book  of  Facts 1925, p. 693).  A more  ambitious 
objective  is  to  try  a  comparative  analysis  of  the  recurrent  events  in  the 
hope  of  finding  a  number  of  regularities.  At  the  third  level  quantitative 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 45 ===
32 Analytical  History 
analysis allows  the  investigation  of  definite  correlations  between  various 
factors. In this  chapter,  and  indeed  in  most  of  this  book,  we restrict  our-
selves to the  two first levels. We turn  now  to the  examination  of a number 
of recurrent  events. 
THE  REVOLTS  OF  THE  KRONSTADT  SAILORS 
Kronstadt  was an important  Russian  naval arsenal  situated  several kilo-
meters to  the  northwest  of  St. Petersburg  (renamed  Petrograd  at  the  start 
of the  1914-1918  war)  at  the  base  of the  Gulf  of  Finland.  The  march  on 
Petrograd  of the sailors of the arsenal played an essential role in the revolu-
tion of October  1917.  This successful  intervention  in  the  course  of history 
was nevertheless  preceded  by  several other  mutinies,  all  suppressed  with 
varying degrees  of  severity  (Wieczynski  1988).  These events  are  summa-
rized in  Table 1.4; note  that  the  same  episode  repeated  itself even though 
previous  attempts  had  not  been  successful.  As discusses earlier,  this  phe-
nomenon  contrasts  with the pattern  of imitation  at individual  level. Yet the 
bloody  repression  of  1921  seems to have discouraged  further  uprising  at-
tempts. 
DISTURBANCES  BETWEEN  HINDUS  AND  MUSLIMS  IN  KASHMIR 
In the  Kronstadt  case  all the  events  occurred  within  a  short  period  of 
only two  decades.  This  is  fairly  exceptional  in  the  analysis  of  recurrent 
events; usually  one  has  to  scan  a  much  longer  period.  A case in  point  is 
provided  by the historical  roots  of the Kashmir  conflict.  In an article  enti-
tled "The  Historical  Roots of the Kashmir Conflict"  (Mohan 1992),  the au-
thor pays little attention  to  the  period  before  1945; this is typical of politi-
cal scientists, who are often  reluctant  to look at the more  distant  past.  This 
omission can lead to serious  errors;  thus Mohan's  comment  that  the "com-
munal  riots  which  occurred  in  1931  and  1932  came  after  a period  of  80 
years of communal  harmony"  is not true  (see Table 1.5). The demands  put 
forward  by Muslim people  in a memorial  addressed  in  1924 to the viceroy 
of India  to  a  large extent  paralleled  those  of the  Irish  people  in  the  nine-
teenth  century:  (1) property  rights  of the land should  be given to the peas-
ants; (2) the system of forced labor should  be abolished;  and (3) all Muslim 
mosques in government  possession  should  be handed  over to the Muslims. 
These claims reveal that, like the Catholics in Ireland,  the Muslims in Kash-
mir faced economic  as well as religious oppression. 
In October  1951  the  people  in  the  Kashmir  Valley massively boycotted 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 46 ===
Analytical  History  33 
Table 1.4 Precursors  and  replicas  of the revolt of the Kronstadt  sailors  in October  1917 
Date Description 
Number 
of deaths 
Success (S) 
or 
failure (F) 
1. 1905,  Oct. 26 
2. 1906,  July 
3. 1917,  Feb. 
4. 1917,  July 
5. 1917,  Oct. 
6. 1921,  Mar. 
On October  26 a sailor was killed in a clash; by >1 
the end  of the day the rebellion  had  been  joined 
by 3,000  sailors  and  1,500  soldiers.  Two days 
later, ships with specially selected crews arrived 
at Kronstadt  and  the  sailors were disarmed.  A 
powerful  wave of solidarity  strikes in St. Peters-
burg,  however, prevented  the  crackdown. 
On July 19 there was a rebellion  of the  First and  43 
Second Fleet divisions  that  was joined  by 400 
workers. The next day the rebellion  was defeated 
by government  forces;  43 men were tried  and 
shot. 
On February  28 a new rebellion  broke  out;  sail- about  10 
ors were released from  jails and disciplinary 
units by the insurgents.  Admiral Viren and  sev-
eral other  high-ranking  officers  were murdered. 
Premature  and  abortive  uprising  against  the 
government  of Kerensky. Ten thousand  men,  of 
whom about  3,000  were armed  sailors,  arrived 
in Petrograd.  After a short  armed  conflict  they 
were disarmed;  most  were allowed to return  to 
their base. 
The march  on  Petrograd  of the  Kronstadt  sail-
ors ensured  the  success of the Bolshevik revolu-
tion. 
An uprising  took  place that  was vigorously sup-  600 
pressed by Trotsky. On February  28 a resolution 
was adopted  that  became  the political  basis of 
the rebellion.  A first assault by 25,000  troops 
was a failure. Finally, on March  18  a second at-
tack by 50,000  men  succeeded:  the rebel losses 
were 600 dead. Some 8,000  were able to escape 
to Finland. 
S-F 
Source: Wieczynski  (1988). 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 47 ===
34 Analytical  History 
Table 1.5  Conflict  between Muslims and Hindus in Kashmir before 1945 
Date Description 
Severe restrictions imposed on the religious observance 
of the Hindus by the Afghan governors. 
Muslim people were considered the lowest class during 
the Sikh domination.  During the great famine of 1871, 
the Sikh Maharaja failed to rescue them. 
Insurrection of Muslim tenants against Hindu landlords 
and money lenders. 
Uprising by the workers of Srinagar's silk factory and oc-
cupation of a plot of land by the Muslims. A memorial is 
submitted to the Viceroy of India. 
Widespread communal riots occurred in Srinagar and in 
the rest of the Jhelum Valley. Shops and houses of Hindus 
were looted and burnt.  Many Hindus were killed. 
The central jail in Srinagar was attacked to free an im-
prisoned Muslim leader. The police opened fire; 21 were 
killed. 
7. 1931,  Sept.-Oct. Political  demonstrations  by Muslim crowds. 
8. 1932,  Oct. Riots  in Srinagar. 
1. 18  th century 
2. 19th  century 
3. 1921 
4. 1924 
5. 1931,  June 
6. 1931,  July 13 
Sources: Bazaz  (1954);  Koul  (1972);  Rahmat  (1933). 
the election  to  the  constituent  assembly;  such  a reaction  cannot  be  surpris-
ing if one  realizes  that  the  situation  in  1951  was the  result  of  a long-stand-
ing conflict. 
ANTECEDENTS  OF  THE  FRENCH  DEFEAT  OF  DIEN  BIEN  PHU 
On May  7,1954,  the  encircled  French  troops  of  the  entrenched  camp  of 
Dien Bien  Phu  in  Tonkin  (North  Vietnam)  were  forced  to surrender  to  the 
forces  of  the  Viet  Minh.  This  defeat  created  a  considerable  stir  in  public 
opinion.  It  was  written  that  this  was  the  first  military  defeat  of a  Western 
power  by  a  colonized  people,  a  statement  that  was  patently  incorrect,  as 
shown  by  Table 1.6.  That  such  an  assertion  could  be  made  at  all testifies  to 
the fact  that  nations  prefer  not  to  keep  track  of  painful  events.  Even if we 
restrict  ourselves  to  Indochina,  there  have  been  at  least  two  major  forerun-
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 48 ===
Analytical  History  35 
Table 1.6 Western  army defeats by colonized  people  prior  to Dien  Bien Phu  (1954) 
Number 
Western killed in 
Date country Colonized  people Western army Reference 
1. 1791, Nov. 4 United States Ohio Indians 900 Debo (1970) 
2. 1824, Jan. 21 Britain Ashantees  (Ghana) 1,000 Vincent (1898) 
3. 1842, Jan. 6 Britain Afghans 3,500 Vincent(1898) 
4. 1879, Jan. 22 Britain Zulus (South  Africa) 1,300 Vincent (1898); 
Clammer (1973) 
5. 1883, Nov. 5 Britain Mahdists (Sudan) 11,000 Vincent  (1898) 
6. 1884, June 22 France Vietnamese 800 Teueres  (1978) 
7. 1896, Mar. 1 Italy Abyssinians (Ethiopia) 9,000 Vincent  (1898) 
8. 1921, July 21 Spain Moroccans Martin (1990) 
9. 1950, Oct. France Vietnamese 4,000 Teueres  (1978) 
ners, in 1884  and  1950.  In 1884  a column  of  800  men  was  ambushed  on 
the route  that  follows  the  frontier  between  Indochina  and  China.  In  Oc-
tober 1950  two  columns  under  the  command  of  colonels  Charton  and 
Lepage were annihilated  on the same route.  Approximately  4,000 men were 
killed or captured. 
DEMONSTRATIONS  IN  ALGIERS  BEFORE  AND  AFTER  MAY  13,  1958 
In the  preceding  cases  we  contented  ourselves  with  listing  precursors 
without  addressing  the  question  of  why  these  recurrent  events  looked  so 
similar. The purpose  of the present  case is to suggest how  a more  detailed 
analysis can be carried  out.  The political  demonstrations  in  Algiers raise a 
number  of interesting  questions.  First, the demonstration  of  May 13,1958 
brought  about  the  end  of the  Fourth  Republic  and  the  return  to  power  of 
General de  Gaulle.  This  is  a rare  instance  in  French  history  where  a  sig-
nificant  political change was caused by an event that  occurs  on the periph-
ery, rather than  in Paris. Second, the fact that large demonstrations  involv-
ing more  than  50,000 people took  place so frequently  is a puzzle in itself if 
one remembers  that  Algiers had  a  population  of  only  about  500,000.  No 
similar phenomenon  has  been  observed  in  cities  of  that  size  either  in 
France or  in the  rest of Europe.  How  did  the  people  in Algiers manage  to 
stage such large demonstrations?  This  is a useful  illustration  of what repe-
tition  can achieve. 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

=== PAGE 49 ===
36 Analytical  History 
A typical  episode  comprised  the  following  steps.  (1)  First  the  demon-
stration  was  decided  on  and  planned  by  a  number  of  organizations:  the 
patriotic  leagues,  vigilance  committees,  and  territorial  units.  These  groups 
made  up  an  unusually  large  proportion  of  the  population  of  Algiers. 
(2) Through  the  distribution  of  pamphlets  and  by  loudspeakers,  the  popu-
lation  was  urged  to  demonstrate.  (3)  Shops  and  even  a  number  of  public 
utilities  were  closed  during  the  demonstrations.  (4)  Usually  the  demon-
stration  began  with  the  laying  of  wreaths  in  front  of  the  war  memorial. 
(5) Then  the  procession  would  climb  to  the  Plateau  des  Glieres,  the  largest 
esplanade  of  the  city.  (6)  Once  gathered  there,  the  crowd  would  listen  to 
speeches  and  sang  the  national  anthem  as  well  as  other  patriotic  songs. 
Note  on  this  subject  that,  as  confirmed  by  sound  recordings,  the  level  of 
execution  of  the  "Marseillaise,"  the  French  national  anthem,  was  very 
much  above  what  it  was  in  metropolitan  France  in  terms  of,  for  example, 
number  of  verses  sung.  Even for  a crowd,  repetition  is  the  key  factor  for  a 
successful  performance. 
Table 1.7 shows that  by and  large  the  demonstrations  were  successful  be-
fore May 1958,  with  a  climax  reached  on  May  13.  But that  month  was  also 
a watershed;  after  this  all  demonstrations  were  failures.  Unable  to  stop  the 
march  of  Algeria  toward  independence,  the  extremist  elements  within  the 
European  population  increasingly  resorted  to  violence. 
PARONYMIC  REPETITIONS  OF  THE  OPERATION  OF  DIEN  BIEN  PHU 
We have shown  that  the  Dien  Bien  Phu  defeat  had  a number  of  forerun-
ners. But  that  argument  can  be  extended  to  the  planning  of  the  operation 
itself. 
After  the  departure  of  the  Japanese  army  that  had  occupied  Indochina 
during  World  War  II,  the  Viet  Minh  of  Ho  Chi  Minh  took  virtual  control 
of the  country.  Between  1949  and  1954,  encouraged  by  the  United  States, 
the French  tried  to  bring  the  situation  back  under  control.  In  that  strategy 
a key element  was  the  occupation  of  fortified  positions  from  which  the  en-
emy's supply  lines  could  be  threatened  and  the  movements  of  its  troops 
checked.  This  was  basically  the  pattern  of  all  the  operations  mentioned  in 
Table 1.8.  Yet in order  to  demonstrate  the  strong  similarity  between  these 
operations  one  has  to  describe  them  in  some  detail. 
Hoa Binh  (November  1951-February  1952)  On  November  14,  1951,  a 
parachute  drop  enabled  the  French  occupation  and  fortification  of  the 
position  of  Hoa  Binh  (180  kilometers  to  the  west  of  Haiphong);  this  was 
Brought to you by | Beijing Normal University
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/7/16 8:04 AM

